Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Dr. Linda Boofreight. She's professor
of psychology at Durham University. Her research focuses on
evolutionary and cross-cultural understandings of interpersonal attraction and sex.
SELECTION and today we're going to focus on topics
like gender differences, mate preferences, how the media influence
mate preferences and people's body images and topics like
that. So Dr. Boofright, welcome to the show. It's
a pleasure to everyone. Thank you. So let's start
then with gender differences. I mean this is not
a new topic on my channel, but where do
gender differences stem from? Are they the result of
biological evolution? Are they cultural products, a little bit
of both? I mean, how do you you approach
that question.
So I think, um, part of the issue is
that gender itself seems to be it's a very
human experience, that that kind of psychological sense of
yourself as being a gendered or sex individual. Um,
AND then how that plays out in your your
social and cultural context. Um, SO I mean, my,
my baseline perspective is that at some point, humans
evolved to have that psychological experience of being gendered.
Um, BUT I think where I think research has
got really interesting in the last few years, is
just how much power culture might have to shape
that experience. Um. So I er. I, I get
a little bit frustrated sometimes with, um, some of
the, the arguments people have where they say, oh,
well, you know, evolution didn't stop at the neck.
And of course it didn't. Of course, our brains
are evolved. Um, BUT I think, uh, I think
there's been a tendency to assume that we have
a bit more sort of hardwired in than we
necessarily do. Um, BECAUSE we're so cultural, and we're
so, um, we're just like these sponges constantly learning
stuff and very, very flexible. That, um, I think,
as I think we're going to talk about over
the next few questions, where I've come to over
the years, um, is that I have had less
and less, um, belief that our sort of gendered
behaviors are deriving from sort of very hardcore biological
differences. And I've come to see them as much
more culturally shaped than I used to.
Mhm. And I mean, but when making that kind
of argument, I'm asking this because I think it's
very interesting for people to understand when making that
kind of argument, what are you basing yourself on
when it comes to the science? I mean, why
is it that nowadays you think that culture plays
a much bigger role than you previously thought?
So I think partly it's that we've got more
and better cross cultural data, and we're looking at
things that used to be taken for granted in
more diverse cultural contexts. So to give an example,
um, I used to think that we probably had
a fairly biologically wired in sex difference in impulsivity
and risk taking. Um, I thought that was probably
very robust that testosterone was potentially early in development
priming. Neurological systems to be more reactive, um, and
to lower perceptions of risk. And to in one
on one hand, there still seems to be some
evidence for that, right? That, um, if you give
people exogenous testosterone, you can down regulate their fear
response. So clearly, it's doing something. But by that
reckoning, then you should see a consistent, at least
small sex difference in that direction consistently across cultures.
But then there was some really interesting data that
came from the Mozu in China, who are matrilineal,
um, where power within the household and the economic
power resides with the women. Um. And so then
when they were when they were looking at risk
taking in children, the the children coming from the
matrilineal mozu households, the girls were more risk taking
than the boys, um, when they got to school.
And then it looked like the more time they
spent with children from patrilineal households mixing in school,
the more that that went away. And the boys
became the more risk taking ones. Um, So that
was, that was quite a shock to me. That
was where I suddenly went, oh, maybe even the
really fundamental psychological mechanism that I thought would then
underlie a lot of the other things we see,
may not be as hardwired as I thought it
was. Um. And, um, to give another example, a
few years earlier, um, if we think about sex
differences in cognitive abilities, um, there'd been a fairly
consistent, um, sex difference in mental rotation and spatial
reasoning that looked like, um, there might be sex
differences in how Uh, people navigate and, and in
sort of abstract mental rotation abilities that made men
were performing better. Um, AND then, then two things
happened. One is people started being able to show
you can get rid of that sex difference by
priming people to think that there isn't a sex
difference. And then people respond to that sort of
pressure. Um, IT was basically reverse stereotype threat, rather
than highlighting to women that they're meant to be
bad at this, and they do badly at it.
You tell people, actually, women are really good at
this. And then the sex difference starts to erode.
Um. You can give women practice in video games,
and then the sex difference disappears. And then there
were there were studies in um a couple of
different small scale societies. So one, I think amongst
the the the Himba, um, where men do a
lot of long distance travel and women don't. And
they showed what you'd expect, which is the sex
difference in in um spatial abilities favoring men. But
then there were also data from the Tsimane, where
the the geographical movement patterns were much more similar
between men and women. So although they they have
a division of labor, it's not spatially different. Um,
AND there isn't a sex difference in spatial abilities
in that paper. So again, one of these things
that we thought was probably quite a fundamental low
level cognitive difference between men and women, when it
came down to it, actually, there's evidence that it's
just not necessarily there. And it's emerging because of
these different kinds of experiences. So the only sex
difference that I Remain reasonably confident about for now
is the sex difference in lethal violence. Um, BUT
even, but I am now open to the fact
that even that we might find is more cultural
than we thought, because if if risk taking can
flip in the right cultural circumstances and children, then
presumably violent behavior can also flip because they're they're
quite closely related.
Now, that that's really all very interesting. And let
me ask you, because in one of your papers
you argue that super cultural clustering explains gender differences
too. So could you tell us about that? I
mean, first of all, explain what is a super
cultural clustering and then how it applies to gender
differences.
So this was, uh, we were we were responding
to a paper which was arguing more broadly, and
they weren't talking about gender, but, um, they were
arguing that we would expect to see, um, different
kinds of interactions between cultural effects and biological effects.
So that individual differences, for instance, will play out
differently in different cultural contexts. And they were also
arguing that, um, we don't tend to think about
culture. Um, PROPERLY, but you, you need to be
thinking about what is going on with subgroups and,
and higher level groups and that, that can actually
be explaining quite a lot. Um, SO in the
context of our response, um, one of the arguments
we were making is that, um, sometimes you're going
to see similarities and gender differences in different cultural
contexts, because actually, these different cultures are still clustered
in some way. Um. So I think one of
the examples we used, um, is, you know, so
many countries consume Western media. And as, as is
important in a lot of the rest of my
research, you know, you're you're then you're taking in
the same cultural information. Um, AND while you're doing
that, what that's shaping your ideas, it's shaping your
norms, it's shaping your expectations. Um, AND so the
more that The more that people globalize, or the
more that they have broader shared cultural ideas, the
more that we're going to see these consistencies in
different contexts. Um. And um. Yeah. And, and I
think that was when we that was the first
paper where we started arguing that actually, what's going
on in the process of um Globalization, industrialization, and
all of that is that it's creating a much
more open cultural space for people to find their
own role within. Their roles aren't narrowed down and,
and determined simply by their local ecology. Um, AND
what that means, uh, is that people have a
lot of choices. And if people have a lot
of choices, then social learning becomes really important. Um.
And um, yeah, so when when when everyone industrializes
and everyone globalizes, suddenly there's so much choice. And
then that shared media becomes really powerful.
So I want to ask you about a specific
topic when it comes to gender differences, because if
I remember correctly, I mean, I started the show
back in early 2018, and if I remember correctly,
around 2017, 2018, a few papers came out reporting
or suggesting that there are or there would be
larger gender. Differences in more gender equal countries, like
for example the Scandinavian countries you would find larger
gender differences in terms of personality traits, in terms
of educational and occupational interests, and so on. I
mean, uh uh so several questions have those studies
been replicated er. And, and what do they tell
us exactly? I mean, uh, if those uh gender
difference or gender differences are exist and if they
are larger in more gender equal countries, is it
necessarily because those gender differences are biological in nature
or could there be other explanations?
Yeah. So I, I do think there are other
explanations. I, I think the argument that was put
forward, um, in some of those papers explicitly, and,
and also in some of the discussion around them,
was that, yeah, you, you create this very gender
equal context in which men and women can do
whatever they want to do. And then boom, biological
urges, other things that are driving you. Um, BUT,
uh, But what that's doing is not really grappling
with what the actual, I think cultural processes are
likely are. Um, FOR starters, uh, these papers tend
to treat each country as an independent data point,
which they absolutely categorically should not be doing. It's
not even enough to cluster by continent, which is
the main control you get. Um, THAT'S because of
super cultural clustering, which is what we wrote that
paper about, because these are not independent countries, you
know, Sweden and Norway are not two independent data
points, because one of them used to be in
charge of the other. Um, SO, you know, all,
all of Scandinavia used to be at one stage
or another, um, a Norwegian or Swedish colony. Um,
And and so you have all these shared norms
that then are shaping things. Um, THE second thing
is that, um, to stick with Scandinavia as an
example. On one hand, it's, it's very gender equal,
um, in terms of what women can do. Um,
ON the other hand, um, if you have a
country, and I cannot remember if it's Norway or
Sweden, but if you have a country which gives
people Up to 2 years off work after having
a baby. Um, AND most of the time, even
though they can split it. Um, THE bulk of
that is being taken by women, because of breastfeeding.
So you're, you've got a situation which is very
progressive, but what it's actually doing is further instantiating
the, the norm and the practice of women taking
more time out to look after their option because
they can. Whereas in America, where you're lucky, if
you get any time at all paid for, um,
women tend to go back much earlier. Um, AND
actually do a lot more pumping and keeping going
with uh feeding in artificial ways. Um, SO just
because something is gender equal doesn't mean it's actually
playing out in, in a, in a straightforwardly men
and women doing the same things kind of way.
There are still structural factors which interact with biological
constraints like who has breasts and who doesn't, that
then mean that you might find you have these
sort of unexpected consequences. Um. And then, and then
the, the, the third issue, as I said earlier,
is that, um, just because the environment you're in
is, even if you do have, you know, your
mom and your dad both working, um, There may
still be um cultural constraints on which roles people
go into. And um there are still there's still
that like higher level influence coming from, you know,
globalized media and things like that. And within globalized
media, there is massive, massive gender differences in what
male and female characters do. So even if the
people around you are perfectly gender equal, the total
cultural information you're taking in is still extremely gendered,
and you're still learning, um, that that men and
women do different things.
Yeah, I mean, I've, I've heard feminist critics of
some of these studies, and I think that they
have some very good points, the main one being
that I mean, even though we might consider Scandinavian
countries more gender equal than other countries in the
world, the culture and the reason why, for example,
we have more women who are nurses and more
men who are engineers has a lot to do
with the fact that the culture is still very
much. Patriarchal, even though there's been efforts to make
it more gender equal, and also, for example, when
you look at housework, it seems that the bulk
of the housework is still done by women, even
in Scandinavian countries and for example, if I remember
correctly, in Sweden. I think it's Sweden and I
might be mistaken, but the levels of domestic violence
are higher than people would expect for a a
supposed gender equal country.
Yeah, I mean, I, I actually don't think we're
very good at measuring. Gender equality. Um, IT'S, it
tends to be done with a relative with, you
know, certain indices, people's responses on things like world
value survey, or or European equivalents. Um, AND then,
you know, some kind of legal constraints. Can women
own property? Um, CAN women initiate divorce, things like
that. Um, AND I think actually gender equality is
something that's much more Um, complex and and rich
than that, and I don't think we have a
good national level way of assessing that yet. Um,
AND the, the other factor is, um, I don't
know if you're aware of the this paper came
out last year by, um, I think it's Bergen,
and I'm gonna have to go back and open
the file again.
Oh, yeah, sure, no problem.
There we go. Yeah. So Berger and Berg, um,
published a paper last year where they argued that
this this paradox that more gender equal countries. Um,
HAVE bigger sex and gender differences, um, is actually,
um, basically a product of, um, sort of failure
to control for the fact that these are non-independent
observations. So they, they were, they could demonstrate, um,
Even with nonsense predictor variables, um, that you could
predict gender differences by by by factors that were
nothing to do with, with gender equality and things
like that. Um, WHEREAS, oh, here we go. Um,
FICTION delusions correlate significantly across countries with, uh, uh,
gender differences, uh, individualism, GDP, HDI, cold living, awareness
of your own mortality, beliefs in medical conspiracy theories.
Um, THESE all correlate just as well or slightly
better with sex differences than gender equality. Um, SO
their argument is that actually what's going on is
that there's there's basically a westernization factor. And that
is what's driving all of these correlations, not specifically
gender equality. Um, SO I think until we statistically
get more on top of this issue, we don't
yet have good data either way on whether gender
equality really does change people's um. Yeah, people's psychological
sex differences.
Mhm. No, yeah, those are great points. I would
like to change topics now a little bit. I
mean, um. I, I've heard a lot from er
evolutionary biologists and also evolutionary psychologists that er in
our evolutionary history, men who were more masculine would
have higher er fitness. I mean, is that really,
is that really the case? What is the association
between male dimmorphism and fitness outcomes in humans?
Um, SO, in terms of, What men say in
terms of the number of sexual partners they report,
um, then more masculine men say. Or more, more,
more body, more muscular, more, more V shaped body,
um, greater hand grip strength, taller, more testosterone, uh,
deeper voices. I think everything except facial masculinity. Um,
WE, we found that the more masculine men said
they had more sexual partners. Um, When we so
this was part of a meta analysis that um,
I did with, um, it was led by my
PhD student, my former PhD student, Linda Ludborg. Um.
And yeah, so in terms of self report, success
in sexual partners, more masculine men were doing better.
When it came to actually looking at number of
offspring in in high fertility contexts, um, we found,
um, a, a very small, but across studies, significant
association between measures of basically muscularity and number of
offspring. Um, WE did not find any associations with
testosterone or voice pitch or um or anything else.
Um, SO, do, do more masculine men have higher
reproductive fitness? Um, We don't have very good evidence.
And I think we one of the things we
highlighted in that paper was that there's a slight
problem. There's a lot of research done on, um,
men's self report sexual behavior or sexual attitudes in
low fertility contexts. And that behavior has no fitness
outcomes in a low fertility context because everyone is
using contraception more or less. Um, THERE'S a small
data set on, um, met mor morphological traits and
actual number of offspring in high fertility contexts. And
there's, there's not much that's sort of crossing between
those two clusters. Um, SO, no, at the moment,
you. People can say that it doesn't matter what
we find now, what matters was what happened, you
know, in ancestral populations. My argument would be, if
we're not seeing these strong associations in current high
fertility contexts across, you know, foragers and farmers, um,
as as as well as, um, high fertility industrial
contexts. That suggests to me that we don't have
good evidence that it was happening. 100, 200,000 years
ago. Um, AND that's because humans are, as I've
said, humans are very flexible. We live in a
lot of different ecologies. So I would expect it
to show up in lots of diverse contexts as
long as you don't have really good, reliable, um,
contraception combined with low fertility norms that lead people
to try not to have children while still having
sex. Um, SO I, I think there's a little
bit of evidence there for body dimorphism muscularity, um,
but it's not super strong. And we don't know
what's mediating it.
OK, and where do mate references in humans uh
stem from?
Um, IT'S a really good question. And I don't
think we know necessarily. This is another one of
those things that I used to think was like
straight up, yes, sexual selection has to take down
make preferences. And this is all the ways we're
gonna test it. And then over time, um, I've
seen over and over in my own data, as
well as other people's, that experience is really important.
Um. And, um, just like with the, uh, sex
differences in personality and behaviors data, when you look
at cross cultural data, um, The things that predict.
Um, MAKE preferences, um, are not necessarily consistent across
studies. Um. And, um, we also know that in
terms of, for instance, facial preferences, that's really affected
by experience. Um, SO what your parents looked like,
what the people around you when you were growing
up looked like. Um, Thams and Saxton had this
nice paper comparing people who'd been to single sex
schools versus mixed sex schools, and then they were
at university. And so the the women who'd been
at all girls schools liked faces that were more
feminine than girls who'd been at mixed sex schools.
And for the men, if they'd been at an
all boys school, they liked faces that are more
masculine than if they'd been at a mixed sex
school, suggesting that that long term visual experience was
biasing what they liked. Um, I think The, the
most robust predictor of attractiveness across, um, different kinds
of studies and across cultures has been averageness. So
the extent to which your face is similar to
the sort of population average, um, But there was
a, there was a really interesting paper from Doug
Jones back in 1993. Um, AND he found that
he had 3 sort of industrialized samples in the
US, Russia, and Brazil. And then he had 2
forager samples. Um, I think the, I think it
was the Ace the Hiwi, um, in Latin America.
And every single culture had really strong intracultural agreement
about which of the photos he was showing them
was the most attractive. But the foragers did not
agree with the Americans or the Russians about which
faces were most attractive, right? So, so the industrialized
samples, they were like, yeah, we all know what's
attractive and less attractive. And then the foragers were
like, well, we know what's attractive and less attractive,
but our rankings and your rankings are not the
same. Um So again, that suggests that this, um,
broader shared cultural experience that industrialized populations have might
be might be changing what we think is attractive.
Some people think that industrialization and urbanization itself changes
what we we think is attractive. Um, AND a
lot of the things that we thought were going
to be really robust products of attractiveness don't necessarily
come out. In the, the, the, well, the Doug
Jones study, but also in some of the more
recent studies that have been pushing the boundaries on
on the samples we're working with. So, um, for
instance, Tamsin Saxton, um, sorry. Uh, Isabel Scott and
Ian Penton Vogue, um, worked with anthropologists in a
lot of different places. Um, AND they found that
like facial femininity in female faces wasn't considered necessarily
particularly important in, um, the, the, the forager and
and rural farmer samples. Um, WE ran a study
in rural Nicaragua. Um, AND we found that for
the rural, um, farming and fishing populate communities, um,
they likewise did not care about femininity in female
faces. Um, AND for such a long time, everyone
was like, well, femininity indicates estrogen, indicates fertility. We
must have an adaptation that makes us like feminine
female faces. But, you know, our participants in Nicaragua
didn't care. The people in the capital city, they
did like feminine and female faces. They had the
same preferences as urban samples in any other part
of the world. But the rural participants were looking
at these faces, and they, they couldn't tell what
we were talking about when we were trying to
say, look, Westerners like this face. Why don't you
like this face? I'm like, I don't know. Just
not very interesting. That that like they we were
asking them like, what's the difference between these two
faces? And they were coming out with differences, but
none of it was to do with what we'd
actually manipulated in those stimuli. Um. So, yeah, I
think, I think we have good evidence that um
looking like what people are accustomed to seeing, um,
which
accustomed to seeing in your culture, in
your culture, the people around you and the media,
if you have it, that seems to predict being
attractive. Um, THE Kleisner Ael a couple of years
ago had a really nice big cross cultural paper.
And averageness was the only thing that was really
consistent, um, across contexts was more average faces were
were rated as more attractive in all their samples.
Um, AND that was, that was the only consistent
message from that paper. But anything else, masculinity, femininity,
symmetry, um. Not necessarily, yeah. We, we might have
been wrong about all those things.
Um, AND do, do we know if mate preferences
can vary across the lifespan?
Um, SO there's, there's been some studies in, Um,
again, urban, uh, globalized Western contexts, suggesting like, um,
women's preferences for masculine faces or deeper voices is
stronger during the reproductive years than it is when
you're an adolescent or when you go when you're
going through menopause. Um, THAT'S predicated on the idea
that a masculine male face is important when you
could get pregnant. Um, BUT as I said, well,
in what we found in Nicaragua, what, uh, Isabel
Scott found in some of her forager samples is
that facial masculinity is not considered important in a
lot of other cultural contexts. Um, WE did look
at age effects in Nicaragua, and we didn't find
any. Um, BUT then we were looking at facial
differences that they didn't care about. So possibly if
we'd been looking at stuff that they did think
was important, we would have found something. Um, ALTHOUGH
I don't recall us finding any age effects when
it came to things like body weight or body
shape. Um, SO. Not, not so sure about that,
um. The main thing we have to remember, of
course, is as you get older, your, your experience
of the people around you changes, right? So, um,
You know, when you're when you're 15, and you're
just going through puberty, and the people around you
are just going through puberty, um, what you think
is an attractive potential sexual partner is going to
be very different from when you're 30. Um, AND
the people around you look older, um, and you
look at a 15 year old, and you think
they're a child. Um, SO again, I think some
of these age effects, it's really just, it's, it's
just that you, your perceptions are getting older as
you and the people around you get older.
Yeah, and I mean, I guess that of course
this falls outside of the scope of your work,
I think, but I guess that as we grow
older and depending on the kinds of romantic experiences
we have, our preferences when it comes to a
potential mate might also be influenced by that, right?
Our, our own personal experiences.
Yeah, I mean, you go back to basic um
social exchange theory. Um, AND your, your comparison level,
what a relationship ought to be like is going
to be shaped by by what relationships have been
like for you so far. Yeah, I think that
that just goes without saying, because we're humans, and
we learn.
Yeah, yeah, sure, um, and I mean, uh, in
your work you've also studied specifically preferences for body
weight. I mean, how do those kinds of preferences
vary and do they depend on the ecological context
to some extent or not?
So, um, body weight is a really interesting one
to study because we know that there are big
cultural differences in the levels of body weight we
think is is attractive. Um, WE know there's big
changes historically in terms of, um, sort of idealized
body weight. Um, AND, um, one of the The
arguments was it's because of food access. Um. So
I remember I remember this coming up, you know,
back in the late 90s when I was an
undergraduate, and, um, people would go, well, evolutionary psychology
of of attraction is obviously rubbish, because why is
skinniness really attractive in Western culture? That shouldn't be
something we evolved to like. Um, AND so there
were some attempts to try and figure out what
was going on with that. Um. And um. There
were a couple of papers, so an argument was
made that it's potentially because um. We have plentiful
food, and if people are hungry, then that adaptation
for preferring people whose bodies indicate that they have
good food access would kick back in. Um, AND
so men who were hungry liked, um, heavier women
than Uh, men who were full, for instance. Um,
THAT was in like Western samples. Um, BUT we
also know that Western media really propagates a thin
ideal for women. Um, SO what was really exciting
in our work in Nicaragua was that, um, we
had communities that were very close by. That might
have similar levels of, um, nutrition, but quite different
levels of access to media simply because one small
village was on the route of some electricity pylons,
and the other wasn't. So just by this, this,
um, coincidence of geographical location, one of them got
electricity and therefore TV and the other one didn't.
Um, AND then we had two communities that both
had TV, but one was the big community that
those pylons were heading to. And, um, they, uh,
uh, it was it was a it was a
richer community, and they had more food. Um, SO
I really thought that what we'd find is that
access to media made people like thinness and being
hungry made you like heavier bodies, and maybe the
two would cancel out, or, um, that when you're
hungry, you never like thin bodies. But actually what
we found really was that, um, Access to media
was so much more important than how hungry you
were. So, and, and these, for these communities, it's
not like, it's not like being an undergraduate in
your college halls, and you haven't had lunch yet,
so you're hungry. But these are people who, you
know, between field seasons one year, they, people lost
on average, um, stone in weight. So about, um,
what's that, about 7 kg 5 7 kg. Um,
BECAUSE it was a bad fish season. So, so
body weight is really important for, for, um, sort
of well-being in that context. Um, BUT yeah, they,
it, how much media people were watching predicted. Their
body preferences, um, and obliterated their actual regular food,
um, access as a as a predictor, which I
did not expect. Um, SO that that was a
really powerful demonstration of, again, this idea that um
Western media, which remember, is so evolutionarily novel, might
be overriding a lot of our more would have
been adaptive behaviors and adaptive preferences.
Mhm. That's very interesting. Um, I would like to
ask you now about body dissatisfaction, particularly in young
girls, and I know that for many people, particularly
young girls, this might be a very delicate subject
because they might struggle with things like body dysmorphia
or anorexia or bulimia or something like that. So,
do we know which factors play a role in
that?
Um, SO I think, I think, I think there
are distinct things going on in in in that
list. I mean, eating disorders of dysmorphia, these are,
these are clinical disorders way over here. But I
think, certainly within Western culture, body dissatisfaction is, is
much more common. It's something that occurs, um, you
know, in nonclinical levels. Um. And um. Yeah, the,
the basic definition of body dissatisfaction is that you
perceive a gap between the body you think you
have and the body you want, and that that
gap causes you some form of emotional distress. Um.
And, um, so the, the argument that comes out
of this idea that that like Western Western, well,
Western media, any media that is promoting a particular
body type, um, can create an idea, a shared
cultural ideal of a body that is an internalized
by individuals, um, that might be very difficult to
attain. And if it is very difficult to attain,
that then inevitably leads to some degree of body
dissatisfaction, because you don't have that body. And if
you're in a context where you have a reasonable
idea of what you actually look like, so you
have mirrors, or you have photos or both, um,
and you have this internalized, quite restricted, narrow ideal,
then you're going to get body dissatisfaction, which then
is a potential risk factor for lots of other
things.
Yeah, so, uh, we've already talked about how the
media influence our mate references. Let me ask you
now, about female facial appearance. Does it correlate with
health at all?
Um, So In terms of femininity, we don't have
strong evidence for that. Um, SO there was a,
there was a couple of papers, um. Way back
suggesting that more facially feminine women reported less illness.
Um, WE replicated that, but we also looked at,
um, There were women were photographed at the start
of term. So how feminine they were at the
start of their first term at university was correlated
a bit with their self-reported health over the last
3 years. But then we looked at basically how
ill did they get in that first term at
university when they get freshest flu, and they feel
quite ill. Um, AND the like we had one,
we had one correlation that wouldn't really survive more
control for multiple comparisons. So, I don't think we
really found strong evidence for that, um. That some
people have argued that facial averageness might be associated
with better health. Other people have said it's not.
Um, SO again, I think. Generally speaking, a good
indicator of whether someone is healthy or not is,
do they look healthy. Um, AND everything else is,
is, is a bit too tangential. Um, I've I've
come to the conclusion that basically, if you want
to know how healthy somebody is, you just look
at how healthy they are. And you don't, we,
we probably don't actually rely on all these other
cues. Um, THE only caveat being that, of course,
in Western culture, we are told that Um, weight
is linked to health. Um, CAN be told being
heavy is unhealthy. So again, that stereotype might be
playing into your perceptions of how you think about
a heavier versus a lighter face, um, as well
as heavier bodies.
Yeah, uh, but so accused to health would be
something like, I don't know, uh, clear skin, I
mean, no signs of, uh, skin disease and,
yeah, so yeah. So you look like um there
was the studies looking at like blood oxygenation levels.
So um you look like you have a functioning
cardiovascular system, you don't have current signs of disease.
Um, AND, um, yeah, they're they're probably the main
things.
Yeah. And in the case of male facial masculinity,
I mean, is it a cue to health outcomes
in in any way,
you know. I'm, I'm, I am very, very adamant
about this one now, um. No, so the, the
research, for instance, on testosterone and actual health measures,
um, you can find two studies measuring very similar
things, finding opposite results. Um, STUDIES on, um, Facial
masculinity and health outcomes, um, again, some studies showing
that it's correlated with self-reported past health, but again,
when we looked at how healthy are you in
that first term at university when you're exposed to
all these new viruses, um, if anything, the men
with more masculine faces reported more illness rather than
less, um. And um. Yeah, we just, we just
don't have very good evidence that facial masculinity is
associated with health in any way.
Mhm. OK, so I, I think we've already talked
about, uh, your studies in rural Nicaragua and how
television viewing influences men's preferences for female body size
and shape. Uh, I have, uh, one more question
about, uh, the influence of television and media. Uh,
BUT does, does the presence of muscular males on
television influence men's body image?
Um, I think we can conclude it probably does,
um, so. I still, I still remember listening to
a participant taking part in our research in Nicaragua.
And he was actually being asked questions about muscularity.
And I remember him saying, oh, yeah, yeah, like
in the action films. So he was quite aware
of the fact that he wanted to look like
action heroes. Um, AND, um, Uh, the, my, my
postdoc on the project, Jean Luc, um, Uh, was
talking about the fact that when he was having
conversations with some men in the community, um, they
talk sometimes about buying like weightlifting equipment, um, that,
you know, it is expensive, and they'd have to
bring it in a boat from town. Um, AND
also they don't need it because all of their
jobs are very physical. They're fishing or they're farming,
and they're using their bodies all the time. So
they don't actually need to build any more muscle
than they already have. But they were nevertheless spending
Important money on weightlifting, because they really like the
idea of looking like uh Jean-Claude Van Damme, for
instance. Um, AND there's there's good evidence that, um,
I mean, I think we've all seen it. Anyone,
anyone my age has really seen how action heroes
have become dramatically more muscular in the media over
the last few decades. And, um, we and, uh,
another lab have both shown independently that you can
shift men's idea of how muscular men ought to
be by showing them muscular images. Um, WE actually
found that men's ideas about male muscularity were a
bit more malleable in that way than women's were.
Um, SO it was, it was easier to persuade
men that men should be more muscular than it
was to persuade women that men should be more
muscular. Um, So yes, for all that a lot
of the the discourse focuses on the risks of
media imagery for body dissatisfaction in women and girls,
um, it's pretty clear that we need to be
thinking about it for men and boys as well.
Yeah, no, no, I mean, uh, I guess I've
watched movies from, I guess, every decade and I
remember that basically in the, for example, 50s, 60s,
70s, actors have just Average bodies, I guess, some
of them were even thin and women liked them
the same and even some, for example, musical artists
in the 60s and 70s, they were really, really
thin and they were very popular.
Yeah, yeah, I mean, like the Rolling Stones and
the Beatles had girls fainting in in crowds, and
they were all skinny, really skinny. Yeah,
yeah, yeah, yeah. So uh let me just ask
you one last question, perhaps to like, Summarize all
of what we've been talking about here today. I
mean, when it comes to gender differences and mate
preferences. What, how should people think about them? I
mean, according to what, according to the best science
we have. I mean when, when people are thinking
about, oh, are men and women that different? I
mean, are this type of women the kind of
woman that all men prefer or this type of
men the kind of men that all women prefer?
I mean, what is perhaps the most nuanced way
for people to address those topics?
Yeah, so I think from a From an academic
perspective, if I'm talking to other researchers, I think
what I would say is that, um, We've we've
clearly evolved from shared common ancestors, where mate preferences
and sex roles were like hard coded. Um, BUT
that it seems like the more that we loosened
all of that hard wiring on our behavior, in
order to become the incredibly successful cultural species that
we are. The more that we've probably lost those
mate and and sex difference related traits, as well
as all the other hardwired behaviors that we have
lost along the way. Um, SO I think, I
think I would turn, I would turn around the
argument that, oh, you shouldn't just say evolution stops
at the neck. I don't think that. I think
that our evolution into a cultural species has gone
all the way up through our brains, um, in
in in all respects. Um. I think in terms
of um sort of public communication of these issues,
um. I think it's really important for people to
remember that, um, our ideas about sex and gender
and attractiveness, just like so many of our other
ideas are shaped by our own experiences. Um, AND
that we have our own individual preferences and our
own individual perspectives that come from a, um, a
variety of reasons, how other people treat us, our
own particular abilities and skills and preferences. Um. And
that The more that we accept sort of the,
the, the diversity possible within humans and the diversity
that that that exists, um, the, the happier we
can be. I suppose existing as our own individual
weird selves. I, I, I mainly talk about this
in terms of body image. So I always think
it's, we've got to accept that we, we are
in the bodies we are in. And yes, we
are in cultural systems that create pressures for us.
Um. But the um, yeah, the, the more that
we accept the wonderful diversity of humanity, the more
that we can accept that in ourselves too.
Mhm. No, that's a great note to end on.
uh AND uh just before we go, where can
people find your work on the internet?
Um, SO I have a lab, uh, web page,
um, which I think you can find on a
shortcut via www.boothlab.org. And it should shortcut to my,
uh, university webpage.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
real pleasure to talk to you and it's been
a very fascinating conversation. OK, thank you very much.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Sverggoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarinth, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Eddin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel P Scortez
or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry V. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.